Hello and welcome to another tutorial.
We are going to continue our discussion on how to set up a default compiler toolchain on different platforms.
We looked at macros and Linux and now let's look at Windows and we said that Windows is a little bit
different because obviously Windows doesn't come by default with its platform toolchain and by toolchain
we mean the compiler that people who develop the windows, Microsoft, they also develop their own compiler,
which is called MSK, Microsoft visual compiler.
So you have to kind of go there and install it.
And when you install it, it basically it's a very big application.
It has a very nice IDE, a lot of features built into that ID, but it also provides the it also comes
with the command line tools, which means you can just call the compiler in the terminal, in the command
line in Windows and manually compile a CPP file.
Obviously, Microsoft doesn't recommend that.
So Microsoft recommends that you open up the Microsoft Visual Studio ID and then and then just use the
ID because ID does a lot of stuff behind the scenes to make the compilation much easier and it's free.
The community edition is free, so you can just download it and use it free of charge.
And then if you want to basically use the command line tools that come with the Microsoft Visual Studio,
which is the compiler that is available on the terminal to compile a C++ application, you have to make
sure that you add the the corresponding directories that you need to add to the past environment very
well in Windows.
And we say that in Windows, the environment variables are are in between double percent in Mac OS and
Linux.
They just start with dollar sign.
And then the problem is that with RMS, we see there are a lot of directories that you have to add to
the path and I believe when you install it by default, it doesn't add them to the path environment
variable.
So this ends up something that you have to manually do.
Now the good thing is that they actually provide a shell executable, a script that you can just run
in the terminal, in the command line, in Windows, and that automatically appends a lot of stuff,
all the necessary directories to the path.
And in the past I've shown you how to append more directories to the path environment variable on mac
os and Linux.
Same story can be applied to Windows.
Just know that in Windows the path separator is semicolon instead of column.
So in in windows it's a semicolon, the path separator, right?
So the path separator is a semicolon instead of colon or so it's a dot and then a comma, right semicolon.
So in order to download the Visual Studio, you have to go to Visual Studio, Microsoft.com slash downloads
and then choose the obviously the community edition, which is free.
And then there you download the a very small application which is the actual installer.
So it's not the actual application, it's the installer you download it and when you run it, it installs
the installer for Visual Studio and then after that it asks you which components you want to install.
So Visual Studio has a core, which is the idea, but then a lot of let's say plug ins or components,
a lot of extra or additional components that you can install.
And after that it just goes to Microsoft Repository and downloads the files that need to be installed.
So the this file that you download is very small file because it's the installer.
And then then after you select the items in the installer, then it downloads the entire thing.
So and that big download is like it takes a lot of time, right?
It's a couple of gigabytes.
And so the build tool in Windows, again it's the Microsoft visual compiler.
And then on the terminal, once you add the proper directories after installing the RMS, we see if
you add the proper directories to the PATH environment variables, then the compiler, the name of the
compiler or the executable is CL or CL exit.
We know that in Mac OS and Linux, the executable files don't have any extension.
In Windows they have dot XY, but in the terminal on the command line, it doesn't matter if you just
name the type, the name or with or without the dot x extension to the command line in windows.
It doesn't matter.
So I recommend don't use the dot exit, just type the CL.
So CL is the command line and you see the directory in Microsoft Visual Studio is called CLI or command
line interface.
And CL is the command line or the compiler.
Right?
So you pass the CP file to the CL and then you compile.
And again in Mac OS and Linux, usually we type C++, for example.
Use there to use the compiler or the toolchain in windows.
On the command line you type CL or CL exit.
MSC provides a script that can be easily run to set up all the necessary directories, and these scripts
are very important.
I'm going to show you how to actually do it.
So you go to after you install the MSC, which I recommend.
Choose the default location for installation.
Let's say your root directory is C and then program is Microsoft Visual Studio.
This is the version the year, right?
I'm using 2022 community we see which is the visual compiler auxiliary.
So there is an auxiliary directory there and which means this directory has some helper files or files
that are help.
Just help you set up the environment, development environment and there is a build which means that
this build folder has the files that help you set up the build environment variable.
And then the Microsoft compiler allows you to select whether 32 bit or 64 bit compilation mode.
I believe in Mac OS or Linux.
You don't have the option because they only come with a 64 bit version, at least I'm sure about Max.
I'm not sure.
Maybe there is also some versions of the Linux that are still 32 bit, but Max is now fully 64 bit.
And then after that, these days they switch to the ARM architecture.
So it's a different story.
So here you can select this file we see, which means visual compiler VARs, which means environment
variables.
And then you say set it up for 64 bit.
Right?
The bad means it's a basically executable script for the command line.
So you kind of drag this file.
V C was 64 dot path to the command line and hit enter.
It runs, it executes and then sets up the path environment variable correctly.
So this sets up the directory for the 64 bit Microsoft compiler to the path environment variable.
And after that you can type KL hyphen hyphen version to check that command line terminal can find a
microsoft compiler correctly or not.
After that you are set that now the terminal is ready and it can the default toolchain is correctly
recognized by the terminal and then we can just create a simple helloworld dhcp and compile it and then
using the CL command and then hello, all that cpp and then we can execute it.
All right.
Now to show you again after you run the receiver, 64 at bat.
So here I just dragged the file here to the terminal and then hit enter.
It says Visual Studio 22 Developer Command Prompt and then environment initialize for x 64.
Again, if you want to compile in a 32 bit mode, you drag the VC vars 32 if you want to compile in
a 64 beat mode, which is the default compilation these days, you drag the VC for 64 and after everything
is successful it says that environment initialized for X 64 and then after that you can create a helloworld
anchor part.
And just to show you after you do this and if you look at the path environment variable in the terminal,
you see a lot of directories from Microsoft Visual Studio have been added to the past, a few directories
from the system 32, for example, Windows key to dot net.
So and also some of the system 32 bit kernel directories for compilation.
But you see, I mean manually setting these up is very tedious.
There are a lot of directories involved.
So let's head to Windows and I will actually show you how to do this.
So I've already installed the Microsoft Microsoft Visual Studio, but in general, you go to let's see,
what was the name of the directory.
So Visual Studio dot microsoft.com slash download.
So let's copy this, go to windows and paste this here Visual Studio dot microsoft.com downloads.
Right?
And then you click on this community edition which is free and then basically download Visual Studio
and the file should pop up here.
Yeah, let's open the directory.
And I already downloaded this installer.
Remember, this is not the entire basically installation file, right?
This is only 1.6 megabytes.
So this is just a small size file which actually is called the installer, Visual Studio Installer.
Right.
So let's close this.
So this takes some time to set up and after that it shows you a interface agree that tells you what
you want to do, like which items to select.
And after that it goes and downloads those items and installs the Microsoft visual.
So then it takes a lot of time, but here I'm just going to show you the steps so that you're familiar.
And here when this installer runs, it already checks your operating system to see if a Visual Studio
has been already installed.
Let's say previously you've installed or basically other versions of Visual Studio and now you have
the option to upgrade the current version, right?
So let's wait for these to bring up the installer and see what happens.
And what I'm going to do.
I'm going to also open a command prompt, which is a steel comes with windows.
There is a newer version of PowerShell which is a little bit different.
But for the sake of these tutorials, I'm going to work with the command prompt.
If I say class, hyphen, hyphen, virgin, hyphen, hyphen, virgin and hit enter, it's not going
to recognize the command prompt.
And if I say echo percent path.
Okay.
So this is liking that if I say path A, you see none of the visual.
None of the Visual Studio directories are included.
So we have to fix this.
And the way we fix this is by running that basically a shell script or command prompt script.
So it tells me that you've already installed this visual is to do committee 2022.
If you haven't installed it, then you select it and you select like C++ libraries or DOT net frameworks,
etc. and then it goes and downloads them and then install, install them and it takes a long time.
So it tells me that enterprise or professional editions are also available.
Obviously I'm just interested in the free version, which is the community and there is an update available,
but I'm not going to do any updates.
Right.
All right.
So at the moment, our terminal doesn't understand cannot find the default toolchain, which is SVC.
What we're going to do is we're going to open up a directory and then go to the root directory, which
is our C directory and then a program files and then Microsoft Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition.
And then we see visual compiler auxiliary and then build.
And here there is a script called we see VARs 64.
I'm going to drag it here and hit enter and this is going to execute this and append the correct directory
to my path environment variable so that the terminal now can find the executable compiler which is KL
hyphen hyphen Virgin.
And now it says that the terminal can find the C++ compiler for 64 bit compilation mode.
And then
so you can also say, for example, CL exit in Windows, it doesn't matter, right?
All right.
So what we're going to do next is that now we're going to I created this.
So let's go to desktop, desktop.
And in this test directory, I've created this.
And then here I'm going to create a text file called Helloworld Dot CP.
Just want to make sure that we can compile hello world dot CP.
We're going to change the extension and we accept that.
And then I'm going to basically open it with a text editor.
Here.
We're just going to do a quick hello world so we're going to say that include IO Extreme and then into
main.
We're not going to take any command line arguments at the moment and then we're going to that we're
going to say that stdc out hello world from C++ in Windows and then we push a and line character backslash
and also right and then we save this.
And now we're going to compile we say HCL and then hello world dot CP hyphen out and name the output
file my app and then o has been deprecated and will be removed in future release.
But.
Let's see.
See?
Plus.
So, yeah, I mean, the compilation worked fine.
It says it gives us some warnings, but still it tells me that it created the my app dot.
So if we go back to this test directory, you see we have this my app, that exam and here's one of
the main differences between executing an application in a Windows versus Linux and Mac in Windows.
The current working directory is already added to the past environment variable in Mac OS.
So right now we have this my app hello world.
Right.
And I can directly type if you have an executable in Mac OS or Linux, you have to tell it from the
current working directory.
Execute my app dot exit.
But in windows you don't do that because dot or the current working directory is already added to the
path environment variable.
Right.
And the other thing is that just like Mac OS and Linux, you don't need to type the DOT exe extension
by default.
Whenever you type the name of an application to the terminal or command line, it assumes that it's
an executable.
So if I hit enter here it is still works.
Fine.
Hello, volt from C++ in Windows.
All right, so you don't need to say dot forward slash or backward slash my app because the current
working directory is already appended to the path that's only specific to Windows in macOS and Linux.
The current working directory is not appended to the path.
That's why you always type dot forward slash the name of the executable.
Now if I echoed the path environment variable again, you see that a lot.
All the necessary directories for the CLI or command line interface of the Microsoft Visual Studio have
been appended to the PATH environment variable.
That's why we can just type the CL and it can find a C++ compiler for the 64 bit mode.
All right.
Now, the other thing that I want to point out now, let's try to get some basically command line arguments,
which is the same idea in Windows compared to Mac OS or Linux.
So we say end RC and then character or array of strings or V, which is an area of strings.
And then we're going to therefore size T equals zero ie less than arch C++.
We're going to just push these command line arguments to the ARG, to the console output.
Right?
And then we also push a backslash.
N So we save this.
And then we say CL and then hello world CP hyphen or my app and it creates the my app that exist, right?
So if I say my app or my app that exists now, it also prints out.
So we know that in C++ the first argument it always is always the name of the app is always the name
of the application, exactly the way you type it on the terminal so I can say my app.
Hello, how are you doing?
Right.
And it tells me my app.
Hello, how are you doing?
So we can successfully grab the command line arguments in our C++ in Windows, and later we will see
that the same applies to Java.
Obviously Java is platform independent.
That's why you are basically more familiar with the Java applications in Windows.
But again, the idea is that if I close this terminal and open it again, now I have to run that direct
that file from the receiver 64 again, you just drag it and then hit enter to set up the directories
in the path environment variable again.
Right.
So I mean you can go ahead and run this and then look at the path environment variable to see which
directories are added.
And I've already done this, so you can then go ahead and manually add this to your path environment
variable, which is a little bit tedious, but you can do it so that you don't have to like every time
execute this so that the path environment variable is set up correctly.
Right?
So I hope you enjoy this lecture and have a understanding on how to set up this default toolchain,
which is the Microsoft visual compiler for for the Windows operating system.
Please stay tuned and I'll see the next one.